# Rails Introduction

30mins

## Learning Objectives
- Describe what Rails is used for
- Explain why Rails has become a popular server-side framework
- Describe that Rails is made of:  Action Pack, Active Record
- Install Rails.
- Create a "rails new" application.


## Introduction
Rails is a server-side web application framework.

It was invented in 2003 by David Heinemeier Hansson of 37 Signals (now Basecamp). Rails is based on 3 main ideas.

- Ruby Programming Language
- Model-View-Controller Architecture
- Programmer Happiness (productivity levels)

Like all server-side frameworks Rail's role is to handle receiving HTTP requests and manufacture the HTTP response to be returned.

In week 3 we saw a minimal server-side framework called Sinatra. Rails is much larger and provides more functionality out of the box. It's more 'opinionated' - which means we have to do things in certain way to get it to work.

Rails uses the Model View Controller architecture to organise behaviour.

Rails allows for applications to be created very quickly. Twitter, Github and AirBnB are a few applications that have benefited from using Rails.

**Convention over configuration** is the Rails way. This aims to minimise the amount of decisions required without losing flexbility.

# Changing Role of server side frameworks.
Traditionally the server did pretty much everything.  It's becoming more and more common, however,  for the HTML to be generated by the client (thanks JavaScript).  The server's role becoming more focused on persisting the data, and returning it - often as JSON. This role is known as being an Application Programing Interface API.

We will be focusing on Rails as an API.

## Action Pack/Active Record
Rails consists of two main parts.  The part for handling the request response cycle - Action Pack.  And the part that handles persistence Active Record.  While these parts can be installed individually it is far more common to use command line tools to create a whole rails application for us.

## Quick Demo - a REST app in 5 minutes

```
# terminal

rails new planets_app -d postgresql
cd planets_app
rails generate scaffold Planet name:string diameter:integer atmosphere:string 
rake db:create
rake db:migrate 
rails server
```

> Show the folder structure and rake routes

We're not going to be doing scaffolding or using views this week but you can see that Rails is a great tool for rapid prototyping. One of the reasons it's popular in the start-up world.

## Installing Rails

```
# terminal

  gem install rails -v=4.2.8
```

Versions of Rails change quite rapidly, if you leave off the "-v", you'll get the latest version - so be specific if you want a specific version.

Rails includes some command-line tools, so if you're using `rbenv` to manage your Ruby you'll need to rehash.

```
# terminal

  rbenv rehash
```
Let's make our first rails app!
